# Setting Forth In C

## Malloc and freeeeeee

```
Be it no concern  
Point of no return  
Go forward in reverse
This I will recall
Everytime I fall
I'm free
Setting forth in the universe
Oh I'm free
Setting forth in the universe
Out here realigned
A planet out of sight
Nature drunk and high
Oh I'm free
I'm free...
```

As you can see from those lyrics, dynamic memory allocation in C strongly reminds me of an [Eddie Vedder song](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KDlsH8MbDbs).

## Newcomers to C, aren't usually new to programming

Which creates a problem for those newcomers as they have become accustomed to the run-time environment of their old language handling a lot of work for them.

Yeah, C doesn't do that.

Those languages also have features like "string" or "vector" data types, which C does not possess out-of-the-box.

The standard library of C is also rather sparse, and the APIs provided are platform-specific to Windows, MacOS, GNU/Linux, etc.

## Why does C handle memory differently than most other languages?

C was created in a time when hardware constraints were a much more pressing concern than they are now (December 2020).

But even today, C is widely used in resource-constrained environments like device drivers, embedded systems and operating system kernels.

C is also still popular in the GNU/Linux desktop userland, which has a culture of writing applications that are not resource-heavy.

## What the heck is a pointer anyway?

Sadly, the more general and abstract the discussion gets with regard to pointers, the more confused the student is likely to get.

So you won't find any abstract diagrams of integers sitting in pigeon holes with arrows pointing in all directions in this blog post.

Instead, I will present the following program as an appetiser.

```
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>

char* getVedder() {
  char* eddieVedder = malloc(sizeof(char) * 50);
  eddieVedder = strdup("I'm freeeee!\nSetting forth in the universe...");
  return eddieVedder;
}

int main() {
  char* chorus = getVedder();
  printf("\n%s\n\n%s\n\n", chorus, chorus);
  free(chorus);
}
```

## Windows Autoclose Warning

Double-clicking on the executable generated by compiling the code shown above, will auto-close the console window after the output is printed.

To avoid auto-closing, there are two work-arounds.

1. Add a system call at the end of the main function.

```
system("pause");
```

2. Instead of double-clicking, run the executable from Windows CMD in the same working directory.

```
>a.exe
```

## How do I compile C code with the GNU compiler from the command line?

Once you have GCC installed correctly, run the following command to compile the "main.c" source file inside the working directory.

```
gcc main.c
```

This will produce an exectubale file with the name "a" and either the file extension "exe" on Windows, or "out" on GNU/Linux.

## How do I run the executable from the command line?

From the folder containing the executable, run

Run this command on Windows CMD :

```
>a.exe
```

Or this command on GNU/Linux :

```
$ ./a.out
```

## Why are there so many damn asterisks in there?

1. Nearly all programming languages use a single asterisk to denote multiplication, and so does this code snippet, on the second line of the 'getVedder()' function body.

2. The signature line of the 'getVedder()' function, the declaration of 'eddieVedder', and the declaration of 'chorus' have an asterisk right after 'char'. This denotes that the function returns [a pointer](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pointer_(computer_programming)) to a char, rather than a plain old single value. But be warned that putting an asterisk before the identifier or between 'char' and the identifier has the same meaning in C. So expect to see that notation elsewhere!

## What is the output of that program?

After successful compilation, running the executable makes your terminal emulator sing the chorus from "Setting Forth".

Of course, we could do that with a simple 'printf' statement in the main function. But that wouldn't help us explain dynamic memory allocation, would it?

So instead, we make our 'getVedder()' function borrow some bytes from the operating system with 'malloc', and then call 'free()' when we no longer need them.

## What does getVedder() do?

1. Reserves a chunk of memory for the 'eddieVedder' array using 'malloc'.
2. Copies our hard-coded lyrics to the array.
3. Returns a pointer to the array.

## What does the main function do?

1. Sets chorus equal to the result of calling 'getVedder()'.
2. Prints a format string where percent-s is a placeholder for 'chorus' and slash-n denotes a line break.
3. Frees up the memory borrowed earlier using malloc.

## Okay, that was cool. What now?

* Read books on C.
* Feed cryptic error messages into your search engine of choice.
* Feed your general questions about C into your search engine of choice.
* Write non-trivial programs in C.
* Experiment. Enjoy yourself. Have some fun!
